---
published: true
---
##Episodes of Violence

The second season of *UnREAL* has consciously moved beyond the criticism of reality TV itself to use reality TV as the mechanism to explore the issues behind the camera. Rachel, the central character of the show, began the series with a backstory, including a failed romantic relationship with a camera operator, Jeremy, who is promoted to director of photography. While their history drove some of the conflict in season one, including a significant scene in the season finale, season two punctuated their relationship with a violent encounter. Having been demoted by the new executive producer (who is also Rachel's new boyfriend), gotten drunk, and then led on a mini-manliness retreat by the erstwhile producer Chet, Jeremy runs into Rachel in a production truck. A short argument ensues and is capped off by Jeremy grabbing, throwing, and hitting Rachel.[^1]

That episode of UnREAL is obviously not the first depiction of relational violence on TV, but it seems to parallel a 1998 episode of *Sports Night*, the short-lived Aaron Sorkin sitcom set behind the scenes of a nightly cable sports highlight show. In the fifth episode of the first season, a football player is accused of assaulting his ex-girlfriend. The show is able to get an interview with the player on the condition that they do not ask about the accusations. Natalie, an associate producer, is sent to meet with the player for a pre-interview. She comes back with an injured wrist and it is later revealed that the player assaulted her.[^2]

There are superficial similarities in the two shows treatment of violence: the victims are both young, petite, brunettes, effective in their production roles, subordinate to accomplished female producers, and are attacked while on duty for their shows. It stands to reason that a network sitcom and a much darker cable drama would treat their characters differently, and indeed they do, but beyond the superficial elements, there are important similarities in how the episodes plot the aftermath.

In both shows, the assault becomes the impetus for the plot to follow. *Sports Night* did not show the attack, and indeed, did not reveal that there actually was an attack for some time. *UnREAL* showed the attack and had a witness to it. Chet, in fact, saw the attack and responded by coming into the production truck, grabbing Jeremy, saying "That's not what a man does," and throwing him out of the truck. Chet responds to violence with violence and a verbal reference to masculinity. While it is delayed in the plot relative to the attack, in *Sports Night*, Natalie's suitor (also named Jeremy) comes up to the football player and threatens to "[pay $50 to have [him] killed." It's a bold statement standing within arm's reach of a much larger and stronger person who has a professional and personal disposition toward violence, one that is referred to in the next episode when Jeremy acknowledges "I'm not a big man, Dana. I can't beat people up and I don't carry a gun. I'm a research analyst with a degree in applied mathematics."[^3] The contrast between a football player and a nerd points up the role of masculinity in the assault, and the response of the men around the victim, just as Chet's admonition tries to limit his newfound approach to masculinity. In each case, the toxic masculinity that results in violence is verbally rejected, and rejoindered with more violence.

Similar too are the victims' initial reactions to the assault. Natalie initially responds by hiding that assault at all, blaming her injury on an accident with the door to the van. Once that story is undermined by a witness to the attack and the attack itself becomes known to the rest of the staff, a deal is struck to allow questions about the player's assault on his girlfriend in exchange for Natalie denying an assault to both the press and the league. The interview, in other words, just became much more valuable to the struggling network, and Natalie agrees to keep quiet for the benefit of the show. Rachel is similarly persuaded to not report her assault because Jeremy has been working on the show for a long time, and "he knows where the bodies are buried." Having seen the lengths to which the producers will go in order to create drama, including the suicide of a contestant in the previous season, it is entirely possible the bodies are not metaphorical. Like Natalie, Rachel also hides her assault to the degree possible. She goes on a location shoot with her boyfriend-producer without telling him about the attack, and repeatedly denies that anything is wrong despite her erratic behavior. Where the shows diverge is in their ultimate response. With the support of the rest of the production staff, Rachel agrees to keep quiet about the assault. On the other hand, the producer on *Sports Night* realizes that she "is doing a big thing badly," cancels the interview and encourages Natalie to file a police complaint.

Again, the tone of the two shows is significant. *Sports Night* is uplifting, hopeful, and moralizing. The characters generally do good things, feel conflicted about doing bad things, and are rewarded and punished accordingly. *UnREAL* wallows in the bad acts of their characters. No one is good, no one is clean, no one is pure. That the two shows would end with different resolutions is no suprise, but what stands out is how they took such similar paths to get there. Both of these women agree to prioritize the show they work on rather than their personal moral stances or physical safety. They also agree to do so under persuasion from the accomplished women for whom they work. Persuasion is important there, because neither Natalie nor Rachel is ordered to do or not do anything in the end. Certainly the hierarchy in the workplace is important, but it is a background element. In both shows, the victims of assault are working for successful and ambitious women with whom they have a significant personal connection. Both of those women are also intimately bound up with the shows they produce, so that what is good for the show is good for them. So it is that Natalie and Rachel's decisions are not about what would or would not personally be best, but what is best for "the show," and by extension, their mentors.

The other notable difference is in the production of *UnREAL* and *Sports Night* themselves. *UnREAL* is written and produced by Marti Noxon and Sarah Gertrude Shapiro, both women. They have created a show that is largely centered on woman characters, and with the exception of the suitors on the show-within-a-show, men on the show are primarily defined by their relationships to (and sins against) the women. *Sports Night*, on the other hand, was created and produced by Aaron Sorkin, a man who has encountered criticism for some the woman characters he has written.[^4] That the two shows should both respond to violent incidents in such similar ways likely says something about the relatability of those responses. That is, if the criticism of Sorkin is true and many of the women he writes are "thin, idiotic or harpy-esque,"[^5] while Noxon is celebrated for producing *Buffy the Vampire Slayer* and Shapiro is drawing on her real experience producing reality TV, and they come to the same place or show the same calculus in their characters' arcs, then that calcules likely registers in significant ways with both victims of gendered violence and those close to the victims. That the two episodes aired almost eighteen years apart and so little social and cultural progress has been made on the problem of gendered violence that the same calculus was still relatable is disheartening in the extreme. 

[^1]:Marti Noxon, Sarah Gertrude Shapiro, and Alex Taub, "Infiltration", *UnREAL*, season 2, episode 5, directed by Janice Cooke, aired July 4, 2016 (Lifetime); Marti Noxon, Sarah Gertrude Shapiro, and Vince Calandra, "Casualty" *UnREAL*, season 2, episode 6, directed by Shiri Appleby, aired July 11, 2016 (Lifetime).

[^2]:Aaron Sorkin and Tracey Stern, "Mary Pat Shelby", *Sports Night*, season 1, episode 5, directed by Thomas Schlamme, aired October 20, 1998 (ABC)

[^3]:Aaron Sorkin and Matt Tarses, "The Head Coach, Dinner, and the Morning Mail," *Sports Night*, season 1, episode 6, directed by Thomas Schlamme, aired October 27, 1998 (ABC)

[^4]: Oddly enough, both of the episodes in question have additional writers of the other gender included. *UnREAL*'s Casualty credits Vince Calandra's writing alongside Noxon and Shapiro, while *Sports Night*'s Mary Pat Shelby includes Tracey Stern with Sorkin. Neither Calandra nor Stern has any other writing credits on the respective shows (though Stern produced 22 episodes of *Sports Night*)

[^5]:Eliana Dockterman, "Dear Aaron Sorkin...", Time.com, December 16, 2014, http://time.com/3636226/aaron-sorkin-women-roles-hollywood/
